-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIT 1 : [IT INFRASTRUCTURE]

	All of the hardware, software, networks, facilities, etc., that are required to develop, test, deliver, monitor, control, or support IT services.
 	The term IT Infrastructure includes all of the Information Technology but not the associated people, Processes and documentation.

 	The implementation of an architecture includes the processors, software, databases, electronic links,and datacenters as well as the standards that 
 	ensure the components work together.

 	process --- information --- application --- servers --- building ---

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIT 2 : [INFRASTRUCTURE MODEL]

	# IT building block :
		model processes user information, and this information is stored	and	managed	using applications.
		Applications need	application	platforms	and	infrastructure	to	 run.	
		All	of this is managed by various categories of	systems	management.


		funtional mangement       : Process/information
		application mangement  	  : Applications
		platform mangement 		  : applications Platform
		infrastructure mangement  : infrastrure
									 end devices 
									 storage 
									 networking
									 operating system
									 databases/datacenters

		non functional requirements  : [PAS] performance availablily security


		basically first we have some information which is organissation/user specific and now we need some kind of application to use it , display it , 
		interact with it. so we create applications , these apps need to managed then like with servers etc.... and we have other infrastructure 
		associated with our applications like storage networking , os ,data base etc etc.

		- funtional mangement : Process/information : processes are organization specific – they are the main differentiators between organizations
		
		
		- application mangement : Applications : responsible for the configuration and technical operations of the applications.
			3 types : 
				client application : web browser , word processor
				office application : mail servers , portals , collab tools 
				buisnees specific  : customer relationship , [highly customisable applications] 

		- platform mangement : applications Platform : additional services like 
			frontend servers : webservers http 
			application servers : apache tomcat etc etc
			connectivity : FTP servers 
			Databases : oracel RDMS , SQL etc etc

		- infrastructure mangement : infrastrure :


		non functional requirements  : [PAS] performance availablily security
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIT 3 : [NON FUNCTIONAL ATTRIBUTES]
	Availability Scalability Reliability Stability Testability Recoverability

	There might be tradeoff in these attributes , may be we want more availabilty , but might lose security ...
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIT 4 : [AVAILABILITY]	
	No matter how much effort is spent on creating high available infrastructures, there is always a chance of downtime.

	Overview : calculating availabilty , managinng human factors , design for resilience, disaster recovery

	# Calculating availability :
		availability of a system is usually expressed as a percentage of uptime in a given time period.
		range of 99.99% or higher.
		99.999% uptime is also known as carrier grade availability [like in telecommunications etc 24/7 stuff]
		downtime should not occur  in one event, nor evenly distributed over time. 

		MTBF and MTTR : 
			mean time b/w failure [MTBF] : average time that passes between failures.
			mean time to repair [MTTR] : time it takes to recover from a failure.

		    -------------MTBF ------->-----[failure]---MTTR----[fixed]--------->---MTBF------

		    MTTR is generally kept low, spare parts are kept in case (backup)
		    the best way to keep the MTTR low is to introduce automated redundancy and failover

		    Decreasing MTTR and increasing MTBF both increase availability
 			AVAILABITY = MTBF/(MTBF + MTTR ) * 100

 			When a failure of any one part in a system causes a failure of the system as a whole, the availability is called SERIAL AVAILABILITY. To 
 			calculate the availability of such a complex system or device, multiply the availability of all its parts.
 			so if we have more systems available lower the total availabity becomes is case of failure.

 			To increase it , systems should be deployed in parallel, so that there is not single point of failure [SPOF]
 			total availablity => 1 - ((1 - Availability X) * (1- Availability Y) * (1 - Availability Z).....)

 	# Sources of Unavailibilty :
 		- Human errors : 
 					   Performing a test in the production environment.
 					   Switching off the wrong component
 					   Swapping a good working disk in a RAID
 					   Restoring the wrong backup tape to production
 					   Accidentally removing file
 					   Making incorrect changes to configurations
 					   Incorrect labeling of cables

 		- Software bugs : nearly impossible to create software free bugs
 		- Planned maintenance : upgrading hardware or software, 
 							  implementing software changes,
 							  migrating data, 
 							  creation of backups
 		- Physical defects : wear out of hardware
 						   cooling fan not working
 						   disk drivers is broken [plates and platers]
 						   abmient temperature , moisture , vibrations ,aging[capacitors]
 				bathtub curve

 				defects vs time  -> /\_______/

 		- Enviromental Issue : flood , earthquakes
 		- Complex Structure : more complex , more diffucult to handle, more skilled labour required to understand , more chances of failure

 	# Availibity Patterns : 
 		how to eliminate SPOF? RAID , server clusters , double network connections , dual datacenters
 			other ways  are :
 				- Redundancy : Redundancy is the duplication of critical components in a single system, t
 				
 				- Failover : It is the (semi)automatic switch-over to a standby system either in the same or in another datacenter, upon the failure or 
 					abnormal termination of the previously active system.
 				
 				- Fallback : Fallback is the manual switchover to an identical standby computer system in a different location, typically used for 
 					 disaster recovery.
 					Hot Site: fully configured fallback datacenter, would be operational in within 1-2 hrs, incase of failure, requires constant 
 						maintaince to make sure the datacenter is the mirror of original one.
 					Warm Site: less configured some configuarations/instatllation have to be done,though some things which takes longer time to 
 						connect are already maintained beforehand. typically take a day to come into actions 
 					Cold Site: No hardware , just power and cooling , communications link might not be ready.
 				
 				- Business Continuity : identifying threats an organisation can face, disaster recovery planning
 					RPO : Recovery Point Objective [RPO]	
 						It is the point in time to which data must be recovered considering some "acceptable loss" in a disaster situation.
 					RTO : Recovery Time Objective [RTO]
 						maximum duration of time within which a business process must be restored after a disaster.
 						Measures like failover and fallback must be taken in order to fulfill the RTO requirements
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIT 5 : [PERFORMANCE]
	Perceived performance refers to how quickly a system appears to perform its task.
	# Some ways to increase percieved performance is :
		increasing the real preformance xD.
		splash screens[loading screens] and progress bar.
		provide visual feedback to user that something is cooking of what they want (physo lol).

	performance must be considered not only when the system works as expected, but also when the system is in a special state.
	So we should design such system which perform well even in load conditions.

	# Some ways to determine performance :
		- benchmarking : A benchmark uses a specific test program to assess the relative performance of an infrastructure component
			eg : floating point operations per second [FLOPS] , MIPS
			benchmarks are only useful for comparing the raw speed of parts of an infrastructure.

		- Use vendor experience : aaspa dekho, jiska jyada chalta hai uska lo . ex : redmi, Mi , dell , ms etc etc

		- Prototyping : build a prototype and test it , ask for storage networing etc resources from vendors or cloud computing.
			Prototyping should focus on those parts of the system that pose the highest risk
		- User Profiling : User profiling can be defined as the process of identifying the data about a user interest domain.
			test the user specific load, like hotstar, how application would behave based on usage of people of particular interest.
			So we need to know the expected usage of system among typical no of groups of people.

			create performance test scripts for different loads 
			user profiling can help determining the load on various parts of the infrastructure, even before the application software is writte

	# Performance of running system :
		- bottleneck : high system loads, causing some component of the system to reach some limit, occurs mainly when single component is resposible 
			for deleving the performance in whole system.
		- Testing : 3 test 
			- load testing : how system performs under expected load
			- stress testing : how system reacts under extreme load , find the breakpoint
			- endurance testing : how a system behaves when it is used at the expected load for a long period of time.
		  Performance testing should be done in a production-like environment

	# Performance patterns :
		- Increasing performance on upper layers : efficent use of memry , good algorithm , slow queries , garbage collection, java dump blah blah
		- Caching : retaining frequently used data in high speed, reducing the access tine of the data . example save on disks, frequently used pages
		- Web Proxies : caching on internet
			instead of fetching all requested data from the internet each time,accessed data can be cached in a proxy server and fetched from there.
		- Operational data store : a read-only replica of a part of a database for a specific use,used information is retrieved from a separate small 
			ODS database ( i guess what called indexing in data base)
		- In-memory databases : entire databases can be run from memory (primary memeort is faster the secondary memory)
		- Scalabilty : Scalability indicates the ease in with which a system can be modified, or components can be added, to handle increasing load. 
			- horizontal : adding more instances of the same type to the existing pool of resources and not increasing the capacity of existing 
				resources like in vertical scaling. This kind of scaling also helps in decreasing the load on the server. 
			- verticle : increasing the capacity of a single machine by adding more resources such as memory, storage, etc. to increase the throughput 
				of the system. No new resource is added, rather the capability of the existing resources is made more efficient. 

			adv/dis -> based on cost , maintaince , single point of failure , implemetation, latency
		- Load balancer : checks the current load on each server , sends incoming requests to the least busy serverload balancer also increases 
			availability. 
		- High performance clusters 
		- Grid Computing
			hpc mein yeh hai ki ek pool of servers tu ready rakhta hai jismein computation perform hoti hai, bhot hi optimised algo aur switching ke 
			saath, lekin grid computing ek aisa hai jaise bhot saare computers dispatches hai different different locations mein, aur jaise hi koi 
			computer idle dikhta hai woh ek common server se task mang leta hai compute karne ke liye over internet. like similar concept hai lekin 
			domain aur tech bhot different.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIT 9 : [STORAGE]
	# Storage building blocks

			webserver -------HTTP-----------object storage
			 |
			 |
			NAS --------NFS/CIFS------------file storage
			| |
			| |
			| SAN ----fibre channel/iSCI-----LNUs [block storage]
			| |
			| |
		  controller -----PCI-DAS--------------LNUs [logical unit numbers]
		  |   	  |
		 disks	tapes


		 NAS -> network attached storage
		 SAN -> storage area network
		 DAS -> direct attached storage

	# Disks
		command set : two protocols 
			ATA : advanced technology attachment : use simple hardware and communication protocols
			SCSI : small computer system interface : set of standards for physically cconnecting and transferring data between computer
		Two type 
		 - mechanical hard disks : magnetic disks on one spindle with read write head moving 
		 	3 types of disks:
		 		- serial ATA /SAS/NL-SAS
		 - solid state drives : is a disk that doesn’t have moving part and works on  flaSH teechnology, semiconductore based memory
			  main advantage is performance no moving parts, so data can be accessed much faster than using mechanical disks
			  SSDs consume less power, and therefore generate less heat, , no vibrations

			  disadvantage of SSDs is their price per gigabyte
			  rewritten a limited number of times “wear out” more rapidly

		Disk capacity - Kryder's law
			disk capacity has followed a logarithmic increase in size for the last 30 years 
			it states that "the density of information on hard drives has been growing at a rate, increasing by a factor of 1000 in 10.5 
			years, which roughly corresponds to a doubling every 13 months".

	# Tapes
		When storing large amounts of data, tape is the most inexpensive option
		 cheap archive medium ,  long life expectancy, stored offsite to protect data in case of disasters
		 apes are stored offsite , not corruptable to viruses
		 Compared to disks, tapes are extremely slow. They only write and read data sequentially.

		 - Tape library :
		 	A tape drive can handle one tape at a time, and tapes must be changed when more, or other data is needed. 
		 	Tape libraries can be used to automate this tape handling.
		 	It is a storage device that contains one or more tape drives, a number of slots to hold tape cartridges, a barcode or RFID tag reader to 
		 	identify tape cartridges, and an automated method for loading tapes

	# Controllers 
		Controllers connect disks and/or tapes to a server
		A controller typically implements high performance, high availability, and virtualized storage using RAID
		implement cloning, data deduplication
		A controller virtualizes all physical disks connected to it, presenting one or more virtual disks, called Logical Unit Numbers (LUNs).
		more like giving logical address instead of physical address

		## Redundant Array of Independent Disks (RAID)
			high availability of data and/or improvements of performance

			RAID 0 [stripping]
			RAID 1 [mirroring]
			RAID 10 [stripping and mirroring]
			RAID 4 [stripping with parity]
			RAID 5 [stripping with distributed parity]
			RAID 6 [stripping with distributed double parity]


			RAID 0 [stripping]


							|--	d1 d3 d5 d7 [disk A]
				virtual disk	
							|--	d2 d4 d6 d8 [disk B]
					
					easy and cheap way to increase performance over the use of single disks
					doubling the read performance, write performance is faster
					actually lowers availability – if one of the disks in a RAID 0 set fails, all data is lost


			RAID 1 [mirroring]

							|--	d1 d2 d3 d4 [disk A]
				virtual disk
							|--	d1 d2 d3 d4 [disk B]
					disks that contain the same data.
					writes all data to both disks, and reads data from the first disk thatcan deliver the data. 
					a bit slow since we have to update both disks in write ooperation.

			RAID 10 [stripping and mirroring]
				combination

							|--	d1 d3 d5 d7 [disk A]
							|--	d1 d3 d5 d7 [disk B]
				virtual disk	
							|--	d2 d4 d6 d8 [disk C]
							|--	d2 d4 d6 d8 [disk D]
					at least four disks and only 50% of the disk space is used



			RAID 4 [stripping with parity]

			RAID 5 [stripping with distributed parity]


							|--	d1 d3 d5 d7 dp [disk A]
				virtual disk	
							|--	d2 d4 dp d6 d8 [disk B]
			
				Data is written in disk blocks on all disks in parallel 
				parity block of the written disk blocks is stored as well.
				This leads to a good spread of disk usage, lowering the risk of a specific disk failing first
				One disadvantage of using RAID 5 is that the parity calculations can dramatically slow down write performance

			RAID 6 [stripping with distributed double parity]

							|--	d1 d3 d5 dp d7 dp [disk A]
				virtual disk	
							|--	d2 d4 dp d6 dp d8 [disk B]

				The drawback of RAID 6 is some loss of write performance and increased cost for the storage of extra parity blocks
		

		## Data deduplication 
			Data deduplication searches the storage system for duplicate data segments (disk blocks or files) and removes these duplicates.
			maps to hash tags 
			Deduplication can be done inline or periodically
				inline -> check the hash value of new data , if found don't store
				periodically -> store , check the hash value , if found delete

				both have different effect on perfomramce you can think of.

		## Cloning and Snapshots 
			With cloning and snapshotting, a copy of data is made at a specific point in time that can be used independently from the source data	
			[backup]
			=  cloning the storage system creates a full copy of a disk, much like a RAID 1 mirror disk.
			= A snapshot represents a point in time of the data on the disks. From that moment on no writing to those disks is permitted anymore, as 
				long as the snapshot is active. All writing is done on a separate disk volume,original disks still provide read-access,
				 snapshot state is ended, all data is written back to the original disks

		## Thin provisioning [ virtual memory ]

	# Direct Attached Storage [DAS]
		local disks connected via protocol to built-in controller connected to rest of computer which PCI bus.
		In servers, DAS is mostly used as a boot device and for caching.

	# Storage Area Network (SAN) 
		storage network that consists of SAN switches, controllers and storage devices. It connects a large pool of central storage to multiple servers.
		connects servers to disk controllers using fibre channel /iSCI 
		
		core of the SAN is a set of SAN switches, called the Fabric

				server [HBA] ---- switches [fibres] ---- controllers --- disks
			   hot bus adaptors

		SAN Protocols :
			Fibre Channel :
				a dedicated level 2 network protocol
				operates at speeds of 2 Gbit/s, 4 Gbit/s, 8 Gbit/s, or 16 Gbit
				protocol is very reliable, with guaranteed zero data loss.

				3 network topologies 
					- point to point 
					- arbitary loop 
					- switched fabric

			FCoE (Fibre channel over ethernet)
				Fibre Channel over Ethernet (FCoE) is a technology that encapsulates Fibre Channel data in Ethernet packets
				FCoE eliminates the need for separate Ethernet and Fibre Channel cabling
				it transports regular Ethernet payloads as well as Fibre Channel payload

			iSCSI :
				allows the SCSI protocol to run over Ethernet LANs using TCP/IP
				advantage of using iSCSI is that it uses the familiar TCP/IP protocols and well known SCSI commands

	# Network Attached Storage (NAS) :
		a File Server that provide shared file system to operating systems over a standard TCP/IP network

		SAN offers disk blocks (unformatted disks called LUNs) that can be used by only one server, 
		while a NAS offers a shared filesystem to store  files that can be used by multiple servers
		nfs  cifs
		provides redundancy, load balancing, replication of data, and other services, freeing operating systems from these tasks

	# Object Storage :
		storage architecture that manages data as objects, where an object is defined as a file with its metadata, and a globally unique identifier 
		called the object ID.
		Object storage stores and retrieves data using a REST API over HTTP
		Data in object storage can’t be modified. Instead, if a file is modified, the original file must be deleted, and a new file must be created,
		leading to a new object ID

		-----------------------
	
	# Storage availability :
		- Redundancy and data replication
 	    - Backup and recovery
 	    	Backup schemes :
 	    		-> Full backup : is a complete copy of all data,  Restoring a full backup, however, takes the least amount of time.
 	    		-> Incremental backups : save only newly created or changed data since the last backup, Restoring an incremental backup can take a long 
 	    			time.
 	    		-> Differential backups save only newly created or changed data since the last full backup.
 	    		-> Continuous Data Protection (CDP) guarantees that every change in the data is also simultaneously made in the backup system. In CDP, 
 	    			the RPO (Recovery Point Objective) is set to zero

 	    	Grandfather-Father-Son (GFS) based schedule is followed for backup. daily backups are the son, the weekly backups are the father, and the
 	    	monthly backups are the grandfather

 	    - Archiving : Archiving is mostly done for compliancy and regulation reasons.

 	#  Storage performance :
 		Disk performance : Disk performance of high-end and low-end disks are quite different. The main differences are disk rotation speed, seek 
 			times, and their interface protocol. Rotational delay is proportional to the rotational speed.
 			 disk performance is measured in IOPS and interface throughput.
 			 IOPS [input output per seconds] how many read and write operations a disk can complete in one second.
 			 	 = 1000 / (seak time + rotational delay)
 			 Seek time is the time it takes for the head to get to the right track. 

 		RAID penalty : Writing data on multiple disks, however, also introduces some delay. This is known as the RAID penalty.
 			RAID 0: no penalty ,RAID 1: penalty of 2 ,RAID 10: penalty of 2 ,RAID 5: penalty of 4

 			In a RAID 5 scenario, when a write has to be performed to disks, RAID penalty for write operation would be 4 (read existing data, read 
 			parity, write new data,write new parity)

 		Interface throughput : how fast the interface can move data from the disks to the systems consuming the data and vice versa.

 		Caching : 

 		Storage tiering : Tiered storage creates a hierarchy of storage media, based on cost, performance requirements, and availability requirements.
 			4 tiers :
 				-> production data 
 				-> seldom used data , like email archives
 				-> backups 
 				-> archived data

 		Load optimization :

 	# Storage security :
 		Encyption/ decryption:
	 		Data at rest can be secured using encryption techniques, which prevent reading or writing data to disk or tape without the correct
	 		encryption/decryption key
	 		disk encryptionp[encryption/decryptoin key] and tape encryptions [AES protected]

	 	SAN zoning : SAN zoning is a method of arranging Fibre Channel devices into logical groups on a SAN fabric for security purposes
	 		SAN zoning is a method of arranging Fibre Channel devices into logical groups on a SAN fabric for security purposes
	 		Zoning can ensure operating systems only see "their" LUNs, instead of all LUNs in the SAN. This prevents operating systems from altering 
	 		data on disks that don’t belong to them.
	 	SAN LUN masking : LUN masking makes a LUN available to some hosts and unavailable to other hosts.
	 		Using both zoning and LUN masking, two layers of security are implemented.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Extras :
	VPNs : [virtual private networks]
		A Virtual Private Network (VPN) uses a public network to interconnect private sites in a secure way (also known as a VPN tunnel).
		a VPN uses "virtual" connections based on IPsec/SSL (Secure Sockets Layer).
		As soon as an internet connection is available, a remote site can create a VPN tunnel .
		VPNs use strong encryption and strong user authentication, using the internet for transmitting sensitive data is considered safe.

		3 most common VPNs :
			Point-to-Point Tunneling Protocol (PPTP) : individual client to server connections. 
			The Layer 2 Tunneling Protocol (L2TP)
			IPsec enables multiple and simultaneous tunnels and can encrypt and authenticate IP data. It is built into IPv6 standard

    TCP/IP model:
		 TCP/IP model is a concise version of the OSI model. It contains four layers, unlike seven layers in the OSI mode
		   - application layer : It is responsible for node-to-node communication and controls user-interface specifications. Some of the protocols 
		   		present in this layer are: HTTP, HTTPS, FTP, TFTP, Telnet, SSH, SMTP, SNMP, NTP, DNS, DHCP.
		   - transport layer : It is responsible for end-to-end communication and error-free delivery of data, TCP UDP
		   - internet layer :It defines the protocols which are responsible for logical transmission of data over the entire network. IP , ICMP
		   - network access layer : It looks out for hardware addressing and the protocols present in this layer allows for the physical transmission 
		    		of data. (lan , wan , man, pan blah blah)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[NOW I AM IN THE CAB , TELL ME WHERE YOUR PLACE IS]